---
layout: post
title: "Star Wars = Soccer Intro"
subtitle: ""
author: Oneal Wang
categories: [World Cup and Worker's Rights]
image: assets/images/workersrights.png
tags: [featured]
---

The crowd roars as the ball is jousted into the air. The cry of the stadium swings with the ball like a pendulum. At this moment, both sides of the stadium scream their war cries for blood and pain. None of them know of the blood and sweat laid underneath to fuel their dream. Qatar forced countless people to their deaths building their extravagant stadiums. According to Qatari officials, there were "between 400 and 500" deaths among workers at World Cup stadium construction sites. The workers shout for rights, help, and basic freedom all around Earth. Four hundred to five hundred construction worker deaths in Qatar while preparing for the 2022 FIFA World Cup have been widely reported and criticized. The country has faced criticism for inadequate working conditions and labor laws, with some workers facing exploitation, long hours, and hazardous working environments. According to human rights organizations, hundreds of workers have died while working on World Cup-related infrastructure projects. The Qatari government has made efforts to improve working conditions, but more needs to be done to ensure the safety and rights of all workers in the country. The international community, FIFA, and corporations with ties to World Cup projects have a responsibility to advocate for fair and safe working conditions in Qatar, as well as for all workers around the world.

Written by Oneal Wang
